- PCA
Principal components are defined as sequence of unit vectors where
1) the vectors are orthogonal on each other,
2) distances between the data and each vectors are minimized.
PCA is to extract the principal components and change basis,
also commonly used for dimension reduction.

PCA can be processed as:
1) Center the data by subtracting the mean.
2) Compute the covariance matrix, further calculate 
  eigenvalues/eigenvectors from the covariance matrix.
3) Sort the eigenvectors by its eigenvalue and select the top N vectors,
  where N corresponds to the output dimension.
4) Multiply the eigenvectors to get reduced output.

Detailed implementation can be found in pca.py.

- LDA
Linear discriminant analysis is to find a linear combination of 
features that separates classes.

Detailed implementation can be found in lda_*.py.
There are other solutions supported from scikit, SVD and LSQR,
but lda_*.py contains Eigenvalue decomposition version.

In this version, LDA can be processed as:
1) Compute the scatter matrices of between-classes and within-classes.
2) Calculate eigenvalues/eigenvectors for the scattermatrices and
select the top N vectors, where N corresponds to the output dimension.
3) Divide the eigenvectors by its frobenius norm.
4) Multiply the eigenvectors to get reduced output.

Computing the scatter matrices and finding its eigenvectors can be understood as
maximizing variance between classes and minimizing within classes.
Separation between the classes is defined as the ratio of the variances
between the classes to the variance within the classes.
The maximum separation can be achieved by finding the eigenvectors with the scatter matrices.

Covariance calculation is not needed on SVD version, which makes it more suitable for larger example.
Furthermore, the implementation of LDA with Eigenvalue decomposition
can also differ in detail for several versions.
Unlike scikit-learn==0.20.4, version 1.0.2 skips step 3) from the process above.
Details about modifying the step can be checked from the commit id 414065.
https://github.com/scikit-learn/scikit-learn/commit/4140657700cc55830347c871134c8e982d29fab5
lda_0.20.4.py supports sklearn==0.20.4, lda_1.0.2.py supports sklearn==1.0.2.
